In the past five years, USB-C has become the
go-to connector for a wide range of devices.
It’s used on most android phones, notebooks,
tablets, game consoles, headphones, and even
accessories like mice, keyboards, and external
storage drives.
But when it comes to Apple’s most popular
product, the iPhone, USB-C has yet to be adopted.
Instead, every model of iPhone still uses
a Lightning connector that was introduced
eight years ago with the iPhone 5.
This has led people to wonder why Apple hasn’t
transitioned the iPhone to USB-C, especially
for a company who has a reputation of being
the first to adopt new standards.
So in this video, I’m going to explain why
Apple hasn’t transitioned the iPhone to
USB-C, and what that means for their users.
This is Greg with Apple Explained, and you
guys voted this topic into second place in
the last poll.
If you’d like to help decide what topics
I cover in the future, don’t forget to subscribe
and polls like this one will begin appearing
in your mobile activity feed.
Alright now why would Apple, the company who
adopted USB-A before anyone else with the
original iMac, take so long to bring USB-C
to their smartphones?
It’s pretty bizarre, especially considering
they’ve already included it in their iPad
and Mac lineup.
Well, the answer lies in a story that begins
in 2010, when Apple was developing the iPhone
5.
The device would be twelve percent smaller
by volume compared to the previous 4S.
Which meant the large 30-pin connector needed
to be replaced by something smaller in order
to free up space for other components.
At the time, Apple was helping to develop
the USB-C standard with other companies like
Intel, Microsoft, and Samsung.
But the new connector wouldn’t be ready
until 2014.
Two years after the iPhone 5’s release.
So because of the bad timing, Apple was forced
into a corner.
They could either keep the 30-pin connector
for another two generations and sacrifice
the iPhone 5 and 5s’ compact designs.
Or they could create their own proprietary
connector and cause fragmentation within not
only the smartphone industry, but their own
product ecosystem.
It was a lose-lose proposition, but Apple
went with the latter option.
That decision not only cause a huge amount
of backlash from users in 2012, who were frustrated
that Apple made all of their previous iPhone
accessories obsolete, but it’s still causing
them issues to this very day.
For example, when USB-C was ready to go in
2014, Apple wasn’t in a position to transition
the iPhone lineup a second time, just two
years later.
They knew they had to stick with lightning
for as long as possible, or else they would
be in for a PR nightmare.
So they persisted, and when the AirPods were
introduced in 2016, Apple was forced to use
the same connector as the iPhone, since the
two products were designed to be used together
seamlessly.
So Lightning was introduced to yet another
product line.
One that would expand into the AirPods Pro
and AirPods Max, which also had to use Lightning
to maintain consistency between models.
It’s almost like there was a smaller iPhone
ecosystem that existed within the larger Apple
ecosystem.
Because while the iPhone and its accessories
continued to use Lightning, almost every other
Apple product adopted USB-C. The MacBook line
began the transition in 2015, the iPad line
in 2018, and the Mac Pro in 2019.
You also have to consider the other controversial
changes Apple made with the iPhone in previous
years.
They removed the headphone jack in 2016, and
they removed the wall adapter from the iPhone’s
packaging in 2020.
Both of these decisions caused perhaps even
more backlash than the transition to Lightning
in 2012, and caused Apple to think twice before
moving to USB-C, which would only add fuel
to the fire.
So how can we expect Apple to resolve this
connector fragmentation issue in the future?
Well, rumors are suggesting that it won’t
be resolved, since Apple isn’t planning
on transitioning the iPhone to USB-C at all.
Instead, they’re exploring the possibility
of removing the connector from certain iPhone
models entirely.
And there are benefits to this approach.
A smartphone with no port would be more water
resistant since its chassis could be completely
sealed off.
And it would be more durable.
Since inserting and removing a connector thousands
of times can cause wear, buildup of debris,
and contact issues.
But how would the phone be charged without
a port?
Well, Apple has already implemented a solution
with the iPhone 12 lineup.
The models have something called Magsafe,
which is essentially a Qi wireless charger
surrounded by a ring of magnets.
This makes the charging experience very similar
to an Apple Watch, a device that also happens
to be port-less.
And if Apple wants to include wireless data
pass through, they can simply borrow the Smart
Connector from the iPad.
Everything Apple needs to create a port-less
iPhone already exists, and it only seems to
be a matter of time before they make the transition
away from wired connectors entirely.
At that point, I think each category of Apple
device will of their own unique methods of
charging.
Their computers and iPads, which Apple has
been calling computer replacements anyway,
will feature USB-C. Their mobile devices like
the iPhone and Apple Watch will feature convenient
grab-and-go magnetic wireless charging.
While accessories like the AirPods, Magic
Mouse, and Magic Keyboard, will continue to
use Lightning.
With wireless charging available when possible
as a convenience feature.
This approach makes the most sense to me,
but we’ll have to wait and see what decisions
Apple makes with the release of new products
in the near future.
Alright guys thanks for watching until the
end, don’t forget to subscribe to help decide
which topics I cover, and I’ll see you in
the next video.